Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to navigation Jump to search

This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (January 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points. Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article. (May 2015)

(Learn how and when to remove this template message)

FERPA

Long title Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act

Citations

Statutes at Large

20 U.S.C. § 1232g

Legislative history

Introduced in the House by James L. Buckley (C–NY)

Passed the House on January 3, 1973 

Passed the Senate on February 21, 1974 

Signed into law by President Gerald Ford on August 21, 1974

Major amendments USA Patriot Act

United States Supreme Court cases

Owasso Independent School District v. Falvo, 534 U.S. 426 (2002)

Gonzaga University v. Doe, 536 U.S. 273 (2002)

The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 (FERPA or the Buckley Amendment) is a United States federal law that governs the access to educational information and records by public entities such as potential employers, publicly funded educational institutions, and foreign governments.[1] The act is also referred to as the Buckley Amendment, for one of its proponents, Senator James L. Buckley of New York.[2]

Contents

1 Overview 2 Access to public records 3 Student medical records 4 See also 5 References 6 External links

Overview[edit]

FERPA gives parents access to their child's education records, an opportunity to seek to have the records amended, and some control over the disclosure of information from the records. With several exceptions, schools must have a student's consent prior to the disclosure of education records after that student is 18 years old. The law applies only to educational agencies and institutions that receive funds under a program administered by the U.S. Department of Education.[3]

Other regulations under this Act, effective starting January 3, 2012, allow for greater disclosures of personal and directory student identifying information and regulate disclosure of student IDs and e-mail addresses.[4] For example, schools may provide external companies with a student's personally identifiable information without the student's consent.[4] Conversely, tying student directory information[5] to other information may result in a violation, as the combination creates an education record.[6][7]

Examples of situations affected by FERPA include school employees divulging information to anyone other than the student about the student's grades or behavior, and school work posted on a bulletin board with a grade. Generally, schools must have written permission from the parent or eligible student in order to release any information from a student's education record.

This privacy policy also governs how state agencies transmit testing data to federal agencies, such as the Education Data Exchange Network.

This U.S. federal law also gave students 18 years of age or older, or students of any age if enrolled in any post-secondary educational institution, the right of privacy regarding grades, enrollment, and even billing information unless the school has specific permission from the student to share that specific type of information.

FERPA also permits a school to disclose personally identifiable information from education records of an "eligible student" (a student age 18 or older or enrolled in a postsecondary institution at any age) to his or her parents if the student is a dependent "student" as that term is defined in Section 152 of the Internal Revenue Code. Generally, if either parent has claimed the student as a dependent on the parent's most recent U.S. Federal income tax return, the school may non-consensually disclose the student's education records to both parents.[8]

The law allowed students who apply to an educational institution such as graduate school permission to view recommendations submitted by others as part of the application. On standard application forms, students are given the option to waive this right.

FERPA specifically excludes employees of an educational institution if they are not students.

FERPA is now a guide to communicating higher education issues and privacy issues that include sexual assault and campus safety.[9] It provides a framework on addressing needs of certain populations in higher education.[9]

Access to public records[edit]

The citing of FERPA to conceal public records that are not "educational" in nature has been widely criticized, including criticism by the Act's primary Senate sponsor.[10] For example, in the Owasso Independent School District v. Falvo case, an important part of the debate was determining the relationship between peer-grading and "education records" as defined in FERPA. The plaintiffs argued "that allowing students to score each other's tests [...] as the teachers explain the correct answers to the entire class [...] embarrassed [...] children", but they lost in a summary judgment by the district court. The Court of Appeals, ruled that students placing grades on the work of other students made such work into an "education record." Thus, peer-grading was determined as a violation of FERPA privacy policies because students had access to other students' academic performance without full consent.[11] However, on appeal to the Supreme Court, it was unanimously ruled that peer-grading was not a violation of FERPA. This is because a grade written on a student's work does not become an "education record" until the teacher writes the final grade into a grade book.[12]

Student medical records[edit]

Legal experts have debated the issue of whether student medical records (e.g. records of therapy sessions with a therapist at an on-campus counseling center) might be released to the school administration under certain triggering events, such as when a student sued his college or university.[13][14]

Usually, student medical treatment records will remain under the protection of FERPA, not the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). This is due to the "FERPA Exception" written within HIPAA.[15]

See also[edit]

Gonzaga University v. Doe Liability and student records Owasso Independent School District v. Falvo

References[edit]

^ Codified at 20 U.S.C. § 1232g, with implementing regulations in title 34, part 99 of the Code of Federal Regulations

^ "Legislative History of Major FERPA Provisions". U.S. Department of Education.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: url-status (link)

^ "FERPA for Students". www2.ed.gov. 2015-06-26. Retrieved 2020-11-14.

^ a b Mendelsohn, Stephen A. (2 January 2012). "U.S. Department of Education Amends its FERPA Regulations to Allow for Certain Additional Student Disclosures". The National Law Review. Retrieved 9 March 2014.

^ "What is "Directory Information"?". US Department of Education. 26 June 2015. Archived from the original on 2 July 2019. Retrieved 26 February 2020. [...] Typically, "directory information" includes information such as name, address, telephone listing, date and place of birth, participation in officially recognized activities and sports, and dates of attendance. A school may disclose "directory information" to third parties without consent if [...]. (34 CFR 99.37.) {{cite web}}: External link in |quote= (help)

^ "FERPA Tutorial - Directory Information|When is Directory Information Not Really Directory Information?". Office of The University Registrar - Penn State. Retrieved 26 February 2020. It is important to also understand the concept of "implicit disclosure." An implicit disclosure may occur when a list consists only of directory information but the list itself by definition reveals non-directory information. For example, a list of names and email addresses of all students who have a particular grade-point average reveals the students' GPAs. Likewise, a class list containing names and email addresses of the students reveals class enrollments. Since neither grade-point average nor class enrollment are directory items, releasing these lists without prior consent of the students constitutes a FERPA violation.

^ "What is an education record? | Protecting Student Privacy". studentprivacy.ed.gov. US Department of Education. Archived from the original on December 2018. Retrieved 26 February 2020 – via studentprivacy.ed.gov/frequently-asked-questions. [...]records include but are not limited to grades, transcripts, class lists, student course schedules, health records (at the K-12 level), student financial information (at the post secondary level), and student discipline files. [...]

^ FERPA General Guidance for Parents, U.S. Department of Education, http://www2.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/fpco/ferpa/parents.html

^ a b Fuller, Matthew (June 2017). "An Update on the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act". New Directions for Institutional Research. 2016 (172): 25–36. doi:10.1002/ir.20201. ISSN 0271-0579.

^ Jill Riepenhoff & Todd Jones, "Secrecy 101," The Columbus Dispatch, Dec. 17, 2010, http://www.dispatch.com/content/stories/local/2010/10/14/secrecy-redirect.html

^ Dinger, Daniel. "Johnny saw my test score, so I'm suing my teacher: Falvo v. Owasso Independent School District, peer grading, and a student's right to privacy under the Family Education Rights and Privacy Act". Journal of Law & Education. 30: 575–626.

^ "Owasso Independent School District No. I-011 v. Falvo". [...]assuming a teacher's grade book is an education record, grades on students' papers are not covered by the Act at least until the teacher has recorded them. 534 U.S. 426 (2002) {{cite web}}: External link in |quote= (help)

^ Mangan, Katherine (March 5, 2015). "Just How Private Are College Students' Campus Counseling Records?". The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved 17 March 2015.

^ Pryal, Katie Rose Guest (March 2, 2015). "Raped on Campus? Don't Trust Your College to Do the Right Thing". The Chronicle of Higher Education.

^ Rowe, Linda (2005). "What Judicial Officers Need to Know about the HIPAA Privacy Rule". NASPA Journal. 42 (4): 498–512. doi:10.2202/0027-6014.1537. ProQuest 62084860.

External links[edit]

2004 CFR Title 34, Volume 1 Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) G-T loses appeal of OSU pay records denial Inside Higher Ed's News

v t e

Patriot Act

Titles I · II · III · IV · V · VI · VII · VIII · IX · X · History

Acts modified

Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 Electronic Communications Privacy Act Computer Fraud and Abuse Act Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act Money Laundering Control Act Bank Secrecy Act Right to Financial Privacy Act Fair Credit Reporting Act Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 Victims of Crime Act of 1984 Telemarketing and Consumer Fraud and Abuse Prevention Act

People

George W. Bush John Ashcroft Alberto Gonzales Patrick Leahy Orrin Hatch Jon Kyl Dianne Feinstein Viet D. Dinh Joe Biden Michael Chertoff Barack Obama Eric Holder Chuck Schumer Lamar Smith Bob Graham Jay Rockefeller Arlen Specter Mike Oxley Dick Armey Paul Sarbanes Trent Lott Tom Daschle Russ Feingold Ellen Huvelle Ron Paul Lisa Murkowski Ron Wyden Dennis Kucinich Larry Craig John E. Sununu Richard Durbin Bernie Sanders Jerry Nadler John Conyers Jr. Butch Otter

Governmentorganizations

Federal Bureau of Investigation Department of Justice Select Committee on Intelligence Department of the Treasury FinCEN Department of State National Institute of Standards and Technology Customs Service U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement

Non-governmentorganizations

American Civil Liberties Union American Library Association Center for Democracy and Technology Center for Public Integrity Electronic Frontier Foundation Electronic Privacy Information Center Humanitarian Law Project

Authority control

General

VIAF 1

WorldCat (via VIAF)

National libraries

United States

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Family_Educational_Rights_and_Privacy_Act&oldid=1094082810"

Categories: 1974 in law United States federal privacy legislation United States federal education legislation 1974 in education 1974 in the United States

Hidden categories: CS1 maint: url-status CS1 errors: external links Articles needing additional references from January 2012 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia introduction cleanup from May 2015 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from May 2015 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with VIAF identifiers Articles with LCCN identifiers Articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers

Navigation menu

Personal tools

Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in

Namespaces

Article Talk

English

Views

Read Edit View history

More

Search

Navigation

Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Donate

Contribute

Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file

Tools

What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Wikidata item

Print/export

Download as PDF Printable version

Languages

Add links

This page was last edited on 20 June 2022, at 17:02 (UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Mobile view Developers Statistics Cookie statement